.. link: 
.. description: 
.. tags: 
.. date: 2012/08/01 00:30:47
.. title: William Morris
.. slug: william-morris

.. image:: http://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/8/8a/William_Morris_age_53.jpg/476px-William_Morris_age_53.jpg
   :alt: William Morris
   :align: right
   :width: 333px
   :height: 419px

William Morris was a 19th century figure in England, known for his socialist
philosophy, design, and art. He was a member of the Arts & Crafts movement, as
well as the Pre-Raphaelite brotherhood. Of course, you can get all this
`information on Wikipedia`_.

His deep appreciation of work and his dedication towards making beautiful
functional things is one of the reasons I greatly admire him. As I ensconce
myself more and more in the world of coding, I gain a greater appreciation of
how deeply programming is connected to the arts. Matt Mullenweg, the founding
developer of WordPress, often says “code is poetry”. Stewart Brand’s “How
Buildings Learn” has become my bible for thinking about the structure of
software. So obviously, William Morris has some fascinating things to say that
I find very relatable to my work:

    [A] man at work, making something which he feels will exist because he is
    working at it and wills it, is exercising the energies of his mind and soul
    as well as of his body. Memory and imagination help him as he works.

.. TEASER_END

One thing that I find missing from most modern discourse is the sheer pleasure
of working, and creating something. The act of creation is something that
coding contains which is not found in many white collar jobs these days. While
I may not be “working with my hands”, I am making something as much as any
architect, carpenter, mechanic, or mason. Programming is nothing less than the
creation of order out of chaos, which is why Matt’s assertion that code and
poetry are equivalent is so striking.

    Nothing should be made by man’s labour which is not worth making; or which
    must be made by labour degrading to the makers.

At the same time, most programmers are merely toiling, doing busywork, and not
experiencing the sublime joy of creation. While in some respects this is the
natural consequence of working for someone else, it is an awful thing that so
many are engaged in unfulfilling, degrading work.

To conclude, I wish more programmers and software engineers viewed their work
as a valuable creative act that can be a truly meaningful, ecstatic experience.
Too many don’t bother looking outside of their own field for inspiration or
kinship, and I have rarely heard anyone else in my field express solidarity
with blue collar workers.

    I do not want art for a few, any more than education for a few, or freedom
    for a few.

.. _information on Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Morris
